
Exodus
[[1-18]] God & Pharaoh
After Jacob/his son Joseph, Israel multiplied in Egypt and "the land was filled with them."
New Pharaoh treated Israel people badly and meant to kill all baby boys, but failed. A couple of Levi thus drifted a "goodly" child, which was Moses ("Drawn out" (of the water) in Hebrew).

Moses killed a Egyptian who smote an Hebrew(=Israel) and fled Egypt.

The angel of God appeared to Moses "in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush" on the mountain of God, Horeb.
Moses hid his face in fear of seeing God when God called upon him.
God instructed Moses to "bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt" and "every woman shall borrow of her neighbour... and ye shall spoil the Egyptians"
Moses declined for several times until God was angry.

God said Israel was his son, his firstborn. God said he would harden Pharaoh's heart.

?? Bloody husband?
Exodus 4:24-26 the Lord met him and sought to kill him. Moses' wife did circumcision for his son.
Moses went back to Egypt and gathered Israel with his brother Aaron.

5-15 Confrontation between God & Pharaoh
God "hardened Pharaoh's heart" and let Moses show the rod, which could turn into a snake.
God smote the river, turning waters in Egypt into blood.
God called up frogs.
God at last made dust into lice, which the magicians could not do so with their enchantments likewise as before.
God brought flies, murrain, boils, hails and fire, locusts, darkness, death curse on all firstborns but Pharaoh still refused to let go.

Passover, the feast of unleavened bread (leaven=sin), lambs to be sacrificed
God smote Egyptian and they let go Israelis.
Firstborn/male should belong to God.
Israelis walked upon dry land in the midst of the Red Sea while Egyptian chasing troops drowned.

16-18
Manna: only daily

19-40 Covenant at Mt. Sinai
[19] Israelis came into the wildness of Sinai. If they obeyed, "ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation."

[20-23] 10 commandments
- no other gods
- no idolatry
- no taking God's name in vain 不可妄称耶和华的名
- remember the sabbath day, "to keep it holy"
- honor parents
- no killing
- no adultery
- no stealing
- no false witness bearing
- no coveting thy neighbor (and properties)

If a servant (slave) loves his family (who are supposed the master's) and decides not to leave upon dismissal, "his master shall bore his ear through with an awl" and he then serves forever.
etc. and many other regulations

[24-31] God called Moses onto the mountain.
God let Moses build him sanctuary, ark of the testimony 约柜, candlestick, tabernacle with curtains, altar, court around it, and a forever burning lamp.
God stipulated garments for priests (Aaron and his sons):
- breastplate of judgment 胸牌
- ephod 以弗得
- robe 外袍
- broidered coat 杂色内袍
- mitre 冠冕
- girdle 腰带
God instructed the ritual to consecrate Aaron and his sons, and daily sacrifice with lambs, incense during altar for atonement, collection of atonement money, brass laver 铜盆 for Aaron and his sons, holy anointing oil and holy perfume.
God gave Moses two "tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God"

[32] Aaron built a golden calf.
God called them "a stiff-necked people".
Moses besought God, who thereby repented.
Moses called the children of Levi to slay "every man his brother/companion/neighbour", about 3000 men to "consecrate yourselves today to the Lord".

[33-40] Moses made covenant with God again and built according to his instructions, with offerings from Israel people.

But Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation "because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle."
Only "when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys"

{day19: Holiness}
God is powerfully good and unique - "holy".
Getting close to God' intensity while being impure one can be hurt.
Spiritually vs. Ritually impure (in contact with anything related to death, should not go into temple)
God's power, and Jesus go out of temple, touch the impure to make them pure, like impure things used to make others impure simply by contact.
In <John>, the whole world became God's temple. 

{day26: Heaven & Earth}
two worlds
Overlap
connection: temple, tabernacle
sacrifice: animal (absorb sin), Jesus
