Genesis (means "beginning")
1-11 God & the world
12-50 God & Abraham's family

[[1-11]] God's blessing vs. Human rebellion and pride
[1-2] Creation of the world, Adam and Eve in Eden
create Eden with what is "good"
"Adam": "human" in Hebrew
humans as representatives of god's rule, created in God's image
7th day: the Sabbath

Eden
- tree of life
- tree of knowledge of good and evil
good and evil: dignity and freedom of choice - trust God's definition vs. seize autonomy by defining for themselves (which is sin)

[3] Snake and Loss of Eden
[4-5] Abel and Cain, Lamech and other generations
Cain killed Abel out of wroth for his offering not respected

Lamech???Genesis 4:23

[6-9] Corrupted world, the flood and Noah
[10] generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham and Japheth
[11] the Tower of Babel in Babylon, generations of Shem until Abram in Haran

[[12-50]] Abraham's family's failure and God's rescue
Main theme: God's plan to rescue and bless his rebellious world through Abraham's family, i.e. the people of Israel

[12-25] Abram
Abram ("exalted father" in Hebrew) with his family depart out of Haran to Canaan
Egyptian Pharaoh and his wife

Abram separated with his nephew Lot, who settled in Sodom, the people of which were wicked

God's pronouncement about Abram's "seed serve in a land as strangers for 400 years and then return"

Abram, once sonless, had a son with his wife Sarah's handmaid Hagar the Egyptian

God made with Abram covenant (sign of which = circumcision): generations as many as stars, and renamed him Abraham ("Father of a multitude" in Hebrew).

Abraham argued with God for Sodom.
Sodom people were evil and tried to harm two angels, who Lot recognized and protected, even at cost of two daughters.

Two daughters of Lot slept with him and had children.

Sarah bore Issac and cast out Hagar and her son Ishmael.

Abraham sacrificed his son Issac.

Abraham sent a servant back to homeland and asked Rebekah to marry Issac. Her brother and father agreed.

Rebekah bore Esau ("hairy" in Hebrew) and then Jacob ("hold (his brother's heel)" in Hebrew). Esau sold his birthright to Jacob in exchange of red pottage, and was thus also known as Edom ("red" in Hebrew)

[25-36] Isaac, Jacob
God appeared unto Issac alike.
Issac lied alike pretending that his wife was his sister.

Jacob posed as Esau and got blessed by his dying father. Issac sent him away to his uncle Laban.
God appeared unto Jacob alike. Jacob built God's house.

Jacob served his uncle, married his daughters, got rich and left.

Jacob wrestle with god, and was renamed Israel ("wrestle with God" in Hebrew).
Jacob met Esau and erected an altar called El–elohe–Israel ("God, the God of Israel" in Hebrew)

Jacob's wife Leah bore Levi, Dinah and others, Rachel bore Joseph and Benjamin ("Son of the right side/my pain" in Hebrew).

Jacob's daughter Dinah was defiled and her brothers slew all the males in the city. Jacob thus left for Beth-el ("God's house" in Hebrew)

[37-50] Jacob's generation
Joseph was resented and sold to strangers by his brother, except Reuben.
Joseph was jailed after refusing his master's wife who wanted to had him.
Joseph interpreted dreams and was appointed to rule Egypt.
Joseph reunited with his family after saving them from famine.
[50]:20 "But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive."



-----
{day 2: image of god}
People are not supposed to build image ("Tselem" in Hebrew) of god, i.e. idol
because God has already made it: human
Humans are appointed to rule the world
but they define good and evil for themselves and rule badly
God therefore bound himself to humanity through Jesus and showed "the true way to rule as human": by loving, serving both friends and enemies
Jesus sacrifices for our sins
Resurrection: Jesus as "a new way of human", and thus called "THE image of God" or "New Human"

{day 5: covenants}
4 times: Noah, Abraham (trust), Israel people (obey laws), King David (lead a good nation)
New covenant: Jesus, who fulfilled all former covenants broken by humans
